==========
French consumer prices rose 0 . 2 % in September from the previous month and were up 3 . 4 % from a year earlier , according to definitive figures from the National Statistics Institute . 
The state agency 's figures confirm previous estimates and leave the index at 178 . 9 , up from 178 . 5 in August and 173 . 1 a year earlier . 
The index is based on 1980 equaling 100 . 
A breakdown showed that food prices were the most active part of growth with a rise of 0 . 6 % . 
An official linked the gain essentially to higher prices for beef and pork . 
He said summer drought problems that had hit several southern agricultural regions had stopped being a major source of price pressure in September . 
==========
Raw-steel production by the nation 's mills decreased 0 . 8 % last week to 1 , 828 , 000 tons from 1 , 843 , 000 tons the previous week , the American Iron and Steel Institute said . 
Last week 's output rose 1 . 4 % from the 1 , 802 , 000 tons produced a year earlier . 
The industry used 82 . 2 % of its capability last week , compared with 82 . 8 % the previous week and 84 % a year ago . 
The capability utilization rate is a calculation designed to indicate at what percent of its production capability the industry is operating in a given week . 
==========
Sterling Software Inc . said it lost its bid to supply software services to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 's Ames Research Center at Moffett Field , Calif . 
Sterling , which estimated the value of the contract at $ 150 million , said NASA selected another bidder for final negotiations . 
In 1988 , Dallas-based Sterling protested a similar decision by NASA involving the same contract , claiming it had submitted the lowest bid . 
As a result , last March the General Services Administration board of contract appeals directed NASA to reopen negotiations on the contract . 
Sterling said it had requested a briefing by NASA but had not decided whether to protest the agency 's latest decision . 
==========
International Business Machines Corp . unveiled a broad strategy to tackle the biggest problem that manufacturers face when computerizing their operations : Most machines ca n't talk to each other . 
The company unveiled more than 50 products , mostly software , that are designed to integrate the three areas of a manufacturing operation -- the plant floor , design operations and production planning . 
The aim , ultimately , is to increase the flow of information into a manufacturer 's main computer network for use in business planning , marketing and other operations . 
Manufacturers have already spent so heavily on automation that they are one of the computer industry 's leading revenue sources . 
But many manufacturers find that communication between different computers has been rendered nearly impossible by the babel of computer languages used by different machines , including robots and machine tools . 
IBM 's announcement , which was expected and will formally be made to customers today , also marks an attempt to gain credibility on the plant floor , where Digital Equipment Corp . has long dominated and where Hewlett-Packard Co . has recently gained market share . 
Consultants have said that it will take a while for all the pieces of the IBM strategy to fall into place , even though the specific products IBM unveiled will generally be available by the end of the first quarter . 
Sam Albert , a consultant in Scarsdale , N . Y . , said that in the past IBM has developed broad software strategies only for problems that crossed industry lines . 
He said he believes IBM 's decision to invest this sort of effort into a single industry showed that it was getting serious about understanding customers ' problems and was n't just selling technology . 
He said he expects IBM to unveil similar strategies for other industries in coming months . 
IBM 's push is also unusual in its approach to marketing . 
Rather than just send out marketing people to knock on customers ' doors , IBM is making several hundred of its own manufacturing people available to discuss specific needs . 
IBM 's manufacturing staff also will be able to provide software that IBM has developed internally and will be able to form teams with a customer to jointly solve manufacturing problems . 
IBM can obviously bring its expertise to bear on problems related to computer manufacturing , but it could also help customers on software to deal with such things as changes in engineering documents . 
`` We may not have every manufacturing problem , but we have most , '' said George Conrades , IBM 's top marketing official . 
==========
Holiday Corp . said net income jumped 89 % , partly on the strength of record operating income in its gaming division . 
Separately , the hotel and gambling giant said it was proceeding with plans to make a tender offer and solicit consents with respect to approximately $ 1 . 4 billion of its publicly traded debt . 
That debt is part of the $ 2 . 1 billion of Holiday debt that Bass PLC of Britain said it would retire or assume when it agreed to buy the Holiday Inn business in August . 
Holiday said third-quarter earnings rose to $ 39 . 8 million , or $ 1 . 53 a share , from $ 21 million , or 84 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Results for the quarter included $ 19 . 2 million in pretax gains from property transactions , including the sale of one Embassy Suites hotel , and $ 3 . 5 million of nonrecurring costs associated with the acquisition of the Holiday Inn business by Bass . 
Holiday said operating income related to gaming increased 4 . 5 % to a record $ 61 . 4 million from $ 58 . 8 million a year earlier . 
The jump reflected record results in Las Vegas , Nev . , and Atlantic City , N . J . , as well as a full quarter 's results from Harrah 's Del Rio in Laughlin , Nev . 
Third-quarter revenue rose 2 . 7 % to $ 433 . 5 million from $ 422 . 1 million . 
For the nine months , earnings fell 2 . 9 % to $ 99 . 1 million , or $ 3 . 86 a share , from $ 102 . 1 million , or $ 4 . 10 a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue dropped 1 . 6 % to $ 1 . 21 billion from $ 1 . 23 billion . 
The tender offer and consent solicitation will be made to debtholders in December . 
In effect , Holiday is asking holders for permission for Bass to buy their debt . 
Holiday said Salomon Brothers Inc . has been retained to act as the dealer-manager and financial adviser in connection with the offer and solicitation . 
The debt issues involved and the proposed consent fees and cash tender offer prices ( expressed per $ 1 , 000 of principal amount ) are as follows : 10 1/2 % senior notes due 1994 at 101 % ; 11 % subordinated debt due 1999 at 102 % ; 9 3/8 % notes due 1993 at 100 % ; and 8 3/8 % notes due 1996 at 95 . 25 % . 
Holiday said its 15 % notes due 1992 also will be included in the tender offer and consent solicitation at a price to be determined by Holiday prior to the commencement of the offer . 
Holiday said it intends to set the price to give noteholders approximately an 8 . 5 % yield to the call date of Aug . 15 , 
==========
Elco Industries Inc . said it expects net income in the year ending June 30 , 1990 , to fall below a recent analyst 's estimate of $ 1 . 65 a share . 
The Rockford , Ill . , maker of fasteners also said it expects to post sales in the current fiscal year that are `` slightly above '' fiscal 1989 sales of $ 155 million . 
The company said its industrial unit continues to face margin pressures and lower demand . 
In fiscal 1989 , Elco earned $ 7 . 8 million , or $ 1 . 65 a share . 
The company 's stock fell $ 1 . 125 to $ 13 . 625 in over-the-counter trading yesterday . 
==========
Cipher Data Products Inc . posted a net loss of $ 14 . 2 million , or 97 cents a share , for its fiscal first quarter , compared with net income of $ 3 . 8 million , or 27 cents a share , a year ago . 
Revenue for the quarter ended Sept . 30 fell 20 % , to $ 41 . 3 million from $ 51 . 9 million in the year-earlier period . 
Cipher Data , a San Diego maker of magnetic tape peripherals and optical disc drives , said the loss included reserves of $ 3 . 8 million related to a corporate restructuring . 
The restructuring calls for a 24 % reduction in its work force over the next two months , affecting about 525 jobs , Cipher Data said . 
It is eliminating the positions of president and chief operating officer , formerly held by Edward L . Marinaro . 
Cipher Data said Mr . Marinaro consequently has resigned from those posts and from the company 's board . 
Mr . Marinaro could n't immediately be reached for comment . 
==========
SOUTH AFRICA FREED the ANC 's Sisulu and seven other political prisoners . 
Thousands of supporters , many brandishing flags of the outlawed African National Congress , gave the anti-apartheid activists a tumultuous reception upon their return to black townships across the country . 
Most of those freed had spent at least 25 years in prison . 
The 77-year-old Sisulu , sentenced to life in 1964 along with black nationalist Nelson Mandela for plotting to overthrow the government , said equality for blacks in South Africa was in reach . 
The releases , announced last week by President de Klerk , were viewed as Pretoria 's tacit legalization of the ANC . 
Mandela , considered the most prominent leader of the ANC , remains in prison . 
But his release within the next few months is widely expected . 
The Soviet Union reported that thousands of tons of goods needed to ease widespread shortages across the nation were piled up at ports and rail depots , and food shipments were rotting because of a lack of people and equipment to move the cargo . 
Strikes and mismanagement were cited , and Premier Ryzhkov warned of `` tough measures . '' 
Bush indicated there might be `` room for flexibility '' in a bill to allow federal funding of abortions for poor women who are vicitims of rape and incest . 
He reiterated his opposition to such funding , but expressed hope of a compromise . 
The president , at a news conference Friday , also renewed a call for the ouster of Panama 's Noriega . 
The White House said minors have n't any right to abortion without the consent of their parents . 
The administration 's policy was stated in a friend-of-the-court brief urging the Supreme Court to give states more leeway to restrict abortions . 
Ten of the nation 's governors , meanwhile , called on the justices to reject efforts to limit abortions . 
The Justice Department announced that the FBI has been given the authority to seize U . S . fugitives overseas without the permission of foreign governments . 
Secretary of State Baker emphasized Friday that the new policy would n't be invoked by the Bush administration without full consideration of foreign-policy implications . 
NASA pronounced the space shuttle Atlantis ready for launch tomorrow following a five-day postponement of the flight because of a faulty engine computer . 
The device was replaced . 
The spacecraft 's five astronauts are to dispatch the Galileo space probe on an exploration mission to Jupiter . 
South Korea 's President Roh traveled to the U . S . for a five-day visit that is expected to focus on ties between Washington and Seoul . 
Roh , who is facing calls for the reduction of U . S . military forces in South Korea , is to meet with Bush tomorrow and is to address a joint session of Congress on Wednesday . 
China 's Communist leadership voted to purge the party of `` hostile and anti-party elements '' and wealthy private businessmen , whom they called exploiters . 
The decision , reported by the official Xinhua News Agency , indicated that the crackdown prompted by student-led pro-democracy protests in June is intensifying . 
Hundreds of East Germans flocked to Bonn 's Embassy in Warsaw , bringing to more than 1 , 200 the number of emigres expected to flee to the West beginning today . 
More than 2 , 100 others escaped to West Germany through Hungary over the Weekend . 
In Leipzig , activists vowed to continue street protests to demand internal change . 
Zaire 's President Mobutu met in southern France with Angolan rebel leader Savimbi and a senior U . S . envoy in a bid to revive an accord to end Angola 's civil war . 
Details of the talks , described by a Zairean official as `` very delicate , '' were n't disclosed . 
PLO leader Arafat insisted on guarantees that any elections in the Israeli-occupied territories would be impartial . 
He made his remarks to a PLO gathering in Baghdad . 
In the occupied lands , underground leaders of the Arab uprising rejected a U . S . plan to arrange Israeli-Palestinian talks as Shamir opposed holding such discussions in Cairo . 
Lebanese Christian lawmakers presented to Arab mediators at talks in Saudi Arabia proposals for a new timetable for the withdrawal of Syria 's forces from Lebanon . 
A plan currently under study gives Damascus two years to pull back to eastern Lebanon , starting from the time Beirut 's legislature increases political power for Moslems . 
Hurricane Jerry threatened to combine with the highest tides of the year to swamp the Texas-Louisiana coast . 
Thousands of residents of low-lying areas were ordered to evacuate as the storm headed north in the Gulf of Mexico with 80 mph winds . 
==========
In a rare package sale of its real estate , K mart Corp . , Troy , Mich . , has sold 17 of its strip shopping centers to a limited partnership led by New York developer Philip Pilevsky , according to sources familiar with the transaction . 
They estimate the value of the transaction at close to $ 100 million . 
K mart officials and Mr . Pilevsky would n't comment on the sale . 
K mart previously had announced it would report its third consecutive decline in quarterly earnings for the period ended yesterday , the same day the real estate deal was completed . 
Analysts are estimating third-quarter earnings will drop between 13 % and 20 % to about 50 to 55 cents per share , compared with 63 cents per share in the year-ago quarter . 
It is unclear what effect the sale of the shopping centers will have on earnings . 
K mart developed the centers , which range in size from about 150 , 000 square feet to just over 250 , 000 square feet . 
Most are anchored by a K mart store . 
The retailer reportedly will lease its stores back from the developer , who plans to expand the small centers . 
The centers comprise a total of about 1 . 6 million square feet of retail space . 
They are spread around the country and include locations in California , Florida , Washington and Arizona . 
Mr . Pilevsky , who heads Philips International Holding Corp . , a New York-based real estate company , owns more than a dozen other shopping centers in which K mart is a tenant . 
The company is active in office and residential development in New York . 
However , nationally , Mr . Pilevsky controls through limited partnerships about 85 shopping centers with about 17 million square feet . 
K mart runs 2 , 200 K mart stores , primarily in leased facilities . 
The company typically sells the centers it develops , but has usually sold only one or several at a time . 
==========
Republic New York Corp . joined the list of banks boosting reserves for losses on loans to less-developed countries , setting out a $ 200 million provision and posting a $ 155 . 4 million third-quarter net loss as a result . 
The per-share loss was $ 5 . 32 . 
In the year earlier period , the New York parent of Republic National Bank had net income of $ 38 . 7 million , or $ 1 . 12 a share . 
Excluding the provision , Republic earned $ 44 . 6 million , up 15 % from a year ago . 
The bank 's medium-term and long-term loans to less-developed countries total $ 293 million , of which $ 146 million are n't accruing interest , the bank said . 
Republic 's total of nonperforming assets was $ 167 million at Sept . 30 , with its reserve for loan losses now standing at $ 357 million . 
==========
Contel Corp . said third-quarter net income increased 16 % to $ 72 million , or 45 cents a share , from $ 62 million , or 39 cents a share , as a result of strong growth in telephone-access lines and long-distance minutes of use . 
The telecommunications company 's results included a one-time gain of $ 4 million , or two cents a share , from the sale of Contel Credit , a leasing and financial-services subsidiary . 
Revenue rose 8 . 3 % to $ 780 million from $ 720 million . 
Telephone-operations quarterly profit increased 9 % to $ 84 million from $ 77 million , while federal-systems earnings declined 33 % to $ 4 million from $ 6 million . 
Information systems posted a loss of $ 8 million , compared with a loss of $ 9 million a year earlier . 
Customer-access lines increased at an annualized rate of about 4 % and minutes of long-distance use rose about 12 % . 
A 10 % gain in operating profit in the quarter was offset by a 21 % boost in interest expense , reflecting higher consolidated borrowings and interest rates . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Contel closed at $ 33 . 75 a share , down . 50 cents . 
==========
John B . Curcio , 55 years old , resigned as chairman of this diesel truck manufacturer , effective upon appointment of a successor . 
Last month , Mr . Curcio was succeeded by Ralph E . Reins as chief executive officer following several quarters of lackluster or declining performance . 
==========
You 'd think all the stories about well-heeled communities and developers getting HUD grants would prompt Congress to tighten up on upscale housing subsidies . 
No way . 
Congress has just made it easier for the affluent to qualify for insured loans from the deficit-ridden Federal Housing Administration . 
It appears that the only thing Congress is learning from the HUD story is how to enlarge its control of the honey pot going to special interests . 
Right now , the largest loan the FHA can insure in high-cost housing markets is $ 101 , 250 . 
Last week , housing lobbies persuaded Congress to raise the ceiling to $ 124 , 875 , making FHA loans more accessible to the well-to-do . 
But it does that at the cost of deepening the taxpayer 's exposure if the FHA is forced to pay for more loans going sour . 
This is no idle fearlast year the FHA lost $ 4 . 2 billion in loan defaults . 
But the higher mortgage ceiling is only the starter kit for what Senator Alan Cranston and Majority Leader George Mitchell have in mind for housing . 
The Senate Banking Committee will begin hearings next week on their proposal to expand existing federal housing programs . 
Other Senators want to lower the down payments required on FHA-insured loans . 
That would be a formula for ensuring even more FHA red ink . 
Experience has shown that the most important element in predicting a housing-loan default is the down payment . 
Because a purchaser can use an FHA loan to finance all points and closing costs , the FHA can wind up lending more than a house is worth . 
If housing prices continue to fall , many borrowers would be better off walking away from their homes and leaving taxpayers with the losses . 
Much the same thing happened with busted S & Ls , a problem Congress just `` solved '' with a $ 166 billion bailout . 
We hear that HUD Secretary Jack Kemp is toying with going along with some of the Cranston-Mitchell proposals . 
That sounds like a formula for ensuring that he gets dragged into the next HUD tar pit . 
A group of 27 Senators has written Mr . Kemp urging him to reject Cranston-Mitchell and focus on programs that empower the poor rather than create vast new government obligations . 
But even if he agrees , Mr . Kemp does n't write the nation 's housing law -- Congress does . 
And the majority of Members cynically view the current discrediting of HUD as mainly a chance to shove through their own slate of projects . 
Exhibit A is last week 's House vote to fund 40 pet projects out of the same discretionary fund that is at the heart of the HUD scandal . 
None of the grants had been requested by HUD , judged competitively or were the subject of a single hearing . 
More and more observers now realize that the key to ending future HUD scandals lies in forcing Congress to clean up its own act . 
This week , a Baltimore Sun editorial said the Lantos subcommittee on HUD should forget about Sam Pierce 's testimony for the moment and call some other witnesses : the various congressional sponsors of the 40 pork-barrel projects . 
The Sun concluded that Mr . Pierce is only part of the problem -- and a part that 's gone . `` If HUD is to be reformed , '' it concluded , Members of Congress will `` have to start looking into , and doing something about , the practices of their colleagues . '' 
Of course , self-reform is about the last thing this Congress is interested in . 
Proponents of expanding FHA programs say they merely want to help home buyers who are frozen out of high-priced markets . 
But the FHA program is hemorrhaging bad loans . 
Jack Kemp has submitted a package of reforms , and they are surely headed for the Capitol Hill sausage-grinder . 
Like the S & L mess before it , this is a problem Congress should be solving , not ignoring . 
==========
Congressional Democrats and the Bush administration agreed on a compromise minimum-wage bill , opening the way for the first wage-floor boost in more than nine years . 
The agreement ended a long impasse between the congressional leaders and the White House over the wage issue . 
President Bush in June vetoed a measure passed by Congress and said he would n't accept any minimum-wage rise that went beyond limits he set early in this year 's debate on the issue . 
The compromise was a somewhat softened version of what the White House had said it would accept . 
Under the agreement with the House and Senate leaders , the minimum wage would rise from the current $ 3 . 35 an hour to $ 4 . 25 an hour by April 1991 . 
Employers could also pay a subminimum `` training wage '' for 90 days to new workers who are up to 19 years old , and then for another 90 days if the company institutes a specific training program for the newcomers . 
White House officials were delighted that the compromise includes the concept of a training wage , which Mr . Bush has fought for throughout the year . 
`` For the first time in history , we have a training wage that will be part '' of the nation 's labor laws , said Roger Porter , assistant to the president for economic and domestic policy . 
White House aides said that although they made a small compromise on the length of a training wage , the final minimum-wage increase will meet the standards set by Mr . Bush . 
The bill vetoed by the president in June , which the House failed to override , would have lifted the minimum wage to $ 4 . 55 an hour by late 1991 , with a training wage for up to two months , generally for a worker 's first job . 
Mr . Bush had been holding out for a bill boosting the wage floor to $ 4 . 25 an hour by the end of 1991 , coupled with a six-month training wage for workers newly hired by any employer . 
Under the compromise , the $ 4 . 25 level would be reached nine months earlier , while the training subminimum would be shorter , unless it is tied to a training plan . 
Democrats argued that the training wage was a way of allowing employers to pay less than the minimum wage , while new workers need far less than six months to be trained for their jobs . 
Democrats had been negotiating with some Republican congressional leaders on a compromise lately . 
With congressional elections next year , GOP leaders have worried about opposing a minimum-wage rise for low-paid workers at a time when Congress is moving toward a capital-gains tax cut that would directly benefit wealthier taxpayers . 
Republicans have been imploring the White House to compromise on the wage issue . 
In the Senate , Edward Kennedy ( D . , Mass . ) , chairman of the Labor Committee , and Pete Domenici , ( R . , N . M . ) ranking minority member of the Budget Committee , have been working on a compromise , and their soundings showed that the Senate appeared to be heading toward enough strength to override another Bush veto , a Democratic staff official said . 
The House is scheduled to vote this week on the compromise , as a substitute to a new Democratic bill , itself watered down from last spring 's version . 
The Senate will probably vote not long afterward . 
Some Democrats thought they might have compromised too much . 
Rep . Austin Murphy ( D . , Pa . ) , chairman of the House labor standards subcommittee , said they might have done better `` if we 'd held their feet to the fire . '' Mr . Kennedy suggested Democrats `` yielded a great deal '' on the size of the increase , but he cited concessions from the White House on the training wage , which he said make it `` less harsh . '' 
With only 16-year-olds to 19-year-olds eligible , 68 % of workers getting less than $ 4 . 25 an hour , who are adults , wo n't be subject to the training wage , he said . 
The AFL-CIO , which previously opposed the administration 's subminimum idea , said the compromise has `` adequate safeguards , so the youth are not exploited and older workers are not displaced . '' 
Gerald F . Seib contributed to this article . 
==========
Japan has found another safe outlet for its money : U . S . home mortgages . 
An increasing number of big Japanese investors are buying up U . S . home mortgages that have been pooled and packaged for sale as interest-bearing instruments known as mortgage-backed securities . 
As much as 10 % of new U . S . mortgage securities issued by the Federal National Mortgage Association , or Fannie Mae , and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp . , or Freddie Mac , now flow into Japanese hands . 
That may not come as a surprise to Americans who have watched the Japanese snap up properties in the U . S . from golf courses to a stake in Rockefeller Center . 
But it marks a big change for the Japanese , who shunned mortgage securities after getting burned by a big downturn in interest rates a few years back . 
`` You ca n't say it 's a `` tsunami '' ( tidal wave ) , but we 're making some headway , '' says Fannie Mae 's chairman , David O . Maxwell , who visits Tokyo at least once a year to explain and drum up investor interest in mortgage securities . `` Interest is a great deal higher than it was a year ago . '' The steady growth of the mortgage securities market in the U . S . has even triggered talk of building up a similar market here . 
Evidence of the growing Japanese demand for mortgage securities abounds . 
Earlier this year , Blackstone Group , a New York investment bank , had no trouble selling out a special $ 570 million mortgage-securities trust it created for Japanese investors . 
Industrial Bank of Japan , which claims to be the biggest Japanese buyer of U . S . mortgage securities , says it will more than double its purchases this year , to an amount one official puts at several billion dollars . 
And a Fannie Mae seminar this week promises to draw hundreds of prospective investors , who can be expected to channel tens of billions of dollars into the market in the next few years . 
`` Last year , there were only several big investors who were interested , '' says Kinji Kato , a vice president at the international arm of Nomura Securities Co . `` This year , some investors are changing their policies and investing a lot . '' Ultimately , he says , strong demand could help to drive down interest rates on mortgage securities . 
At the moment , Nomura is the only Japanese institution authorized to act as a primary seller of Fannie Mae instruments . 
But other Japanese institutions say privately that they are considering asking to join the 59-dealer selling group . 
These securities are attractive to Japanese investors for three reasons . 
First , they are safe . 
While they are n't backed by the full faith and credit of the U . S . government , as Treasury bonds are , it is widely assumed that the government would support them if necessary . ( U . S . 
Treasury bonds are still the dollar-denominated investment of choice for long-term Japanese investors ) . 
Second , they are liquid . 
The secondary market in federally backed mortgage securities now exceeds $ 900 billion , or nearly half of the $ 2 . 2 trillion in U . S . residential mortgages issued . 
Third , they offer high yields . 
At the moment , some offer as much as 1 . 6 to 1 . 8 percentage points over Treasury securities of similar maturities . 
But there is a risk , which the Japanese discovered when they first dipped their toes into the market nearly five years ago . 
Since most mortgages can be prepaid or refinanced at any time , issuers of mortgage securities retain the right to buy back their bonds before maturity . 
That 's a headache for long-term investors , since it forces them to reinvest their money -- usually at lower rates than the original mortgage securities carried . 
`` Two or three years ago , the problem was that people did n't understand the prepayment risk , '' says Nomura 's Mr . Kato . `` So they were surprised and very disappointed by prepayment . '' 
Compounding the trouble to Japanese investors , mortgage securities pay interest monthly , since most mortgages require homeowners to make monthly payments . 
But Japanese institutional investors are used to quarterly or semiannual payments on their investments , so the monthly cash flow posed administrative problems . 
As a result , Japanese investors steered clear of the mortgage securities . 
But they did n't lose touch with the U . S . issuers . 
Since 1985 , Japanese investors have bought nearly 80 % of $ 10 billion in Fannie Mae corporate debt issued to foreigners , money that Fannie Mae uses to buy mortgages from U . S . banks . 
And Japanese investors took up nearly all of two $ 200 million Real Estate Mortgage Investment Conduits , a kind of collateralized mortgage obligation , that were offered to foreigners this year . 
In addition , further packaging of mortgage-backed securities , such as Blackstone 's fund , have reduced the effects of prepayment risk and automatically reinvest monthly payments so institutions do n't have to . 
Freddie Mac for years has offered a so-called participation certificate that guarantees it wo n't be prepaid for a set number of years and offers semiannual payments . 
==========
Of all the one-time expenses incurred by a corporation or professional firm , few are larger or longer term than the purchase of real estate or the signing of a commercial lease . 
To take full advantage of the financial opportunities in this commitment , however , the corporation or professional firm must do more than negotiate the best purchase price or lease terms . 
It must also evaluate the real-estate market in the chosen location from a new perspective . 
Specifically , it must understand how real-estate markets overreact to shifts in regional economies and then take advantage of these opportunities . 
When a regional economy catches cold , the local real-estate market gets pneumonia . 
In other words , real-estate market indicators , such as building permits and leasing activity , plummet much further than a local economy in recession . 
This was seen in the late 1960s in Los Angeles and the mid-1970s in New York . 
But the reverse is also true : When a region 's economy rebounds from a slowdown , these real-estate indicators will rebound far faster than the improving economy . 
Why do local real-estate markets overreact to regional economic cycles ? 
Because real-estate purchases and leases are such major long-term commitments that most companies and individuals make these decisions only when confident of future economic stability and growth . 
Metropolitan Detroit was written off economically during the early 1980s , as the domestic auto industry suffered a serious sales depression and adjustment . 
Area employment dropped by 13 % from its 1979 peak and retail sales were down 14 % . 
However , the real-estate market was hurt even more . 
For example , residential building permits in the trough year of 1982 were off 76 % from the 1979 peak level . 
Once metropolitan Detroit 's economy rallied in the mid-1980s , real estate rebounded . 
Building permits , for example , soared a staggering 400 % between 1982 and the peak year of 1986 . 
Where , savvy corporations and professional firms are now asking , are today 's opportunities ? 
Look no further than metropolitan Houston and Denver , two of the most depressed , overbuilt and potentially undervalued real-estate markets in the nation . 
Of course , some observers have touted Houston and Denver for the past five years as a counter-cyclical play . 
But now appears to be the time to act . 
Metropolitan Houston 's economy did drop and then flatten in the years after its 1982 peak . 
In the mid-1980s , employment was down as much as 5 % from the 1982 peak and retail sales were off 13 % . 
The real-estate market suffered even more severe setbacks . 
Office construction dropped 97 % . 
The vacancy rate soared more than 20 % in nearly every product category , and more than 30 % of office space was vacant . 
To some observers , the empty office buildings of Houston 's `` see-through skyline '' were indicative of a very troubled economy . 
As usual , the real-estate market had overreacted . 
Actually , the region 's economy retained a firm foundation . 
Metropolitan Houston 's population has held steady over the past six years . 
And personal income , after slumping in the mid-1980s , has returned to its 1982 level in real dollar terms . 
Today , metropolitan Houston 's real-estate market is poised for a significant turnaround . 
More than 42 , 000 jobs were added in metro Houston last year , primarily in biotechnology , petrochemical processing , and the computer industry . 
This growth puts Houston in the top five metro areas in the nation last year . 
And forecasts project a 2 . 5 % to 3 % growth rate in jobs over the next few years -- nearly twice the national average . 
Denver is another metropolitan area where the commercial real-estate market has overreacted to the region 's economic trends , although Denver has not experienced as severe an economic downturn as Houston . 
By some measures , metropolitan Denver 's economy has actually improved in the past four years . 
Its population has continued to increase since 1983 , the peak year of the economic cycle . 
Employment is now 4 % higher than in 1983 . 
Buying income in real dollars actually increased 15 % between 1983 and 1987 ( the most recent year available ) . 
The rates of increase , however , are less than the rapid growth of the boom years , and this has resulted in a loss of confidence in the economy . 
In a self-fulfilling prophecy , therefore , the region 's real-estate market all but collapsed in recent years . 
Housing building permits are down more than 75 % from their 1983 peaks . 
Although no one can predict when metropolitan Denver 's real-estate market will rebound , major public works projects costing several billion dollars are under way or planned -- such as a new convention center , a major beltway encircling the metropolitan area , and a new regional airport . 
When Denver 's regional economy begins to grow faster -- such a recovery could occur as early as next year -- business and consumer confidence will return , and the resulting explosion of real-estate activity will dwarf the general economic rebound . 
What real-estate strategy should one follow in a metropolitan area whose economic health is not as easy to determine as Houston 's or Denver 's ? 
Generally , overcapacity in commercial real estate is dropping from its mid-1980s peak , even in such economically healthy metropolitan areas as Washington , New York and Los Angeles . 
Vacancy rates in the 15 % to 19 % range today may easily rise to the low to mid-20 % range in a couple of years . 
Under these conditions , even a flattening out of economic growth -- `` catching cold '' -- in the healthy metropolitan areas will create significant opportunities for corporations and professional service firms looking for bargains as the realestate industry catches pneumonia . 
Those looking for real-estate bargains in distressed metropolitan areas should lock in leases or buy now ; those looking in healthy metropolitan areas should take a short-term ( three-year ) lease and wait for the bargains ahead . 
Mr . Leinberger is managing partner of a real-estate advisory firm based in Beverly Hills , Calif . 
==========
